[SYCL][DOC] Add extension for FPGA kernel interface properties (#5715)
intel/llvm: sycl/doc/extensions/proposed/sycl_ext_intel_fpga_kernel_interface_properties.asciidoc

= sycl_ext_intel_fpga_kernel_interface_properties
:source-highlighter: coderay
:coderay-linenums-mode: table

// This section needs to be after the document title.
:doctype: book
:toc2:
:toc: left
:encoding: utf-8
:lang: en

:blank: pass:[ +]

// Set the default source code type in this document to C++,
// for syntax highlighting purposes.  This is needed because
// docbook uses c++ and html5 uses cpp.
:language: {basebackend@docbook:c++:cpp}

== Introduction
IMPORTANT: This specification is a draft.

NOTE: Khronos(R) is a registered trademark and SYCL(TM) and SPIR(TM) are
trademarks of The Khronos Group Inc.  OpenCL(TM) is a trademark of Apple Inc.
used by permission by Khronos.

This extension introduces a replacement for the kernel attributes defined in

> Section 5.8.1 of the SYCL 2020 specification, in the form of a property list

Author: Updated.

accepting properties with compile-time constant values.

== Notice

Copyright (c) 2021-2022 Intel Corporation.  All rights reserved.

== Status

Working Draft

This is a proposed extension specification, intended to gather community
feedback. Interfaces defined in this specification may not be implemented yet
or may be in a preliminary state. The specification itself may also change in
incompatible ways before it is finalized. Shipping software products should not
rely on APIs defined in this specification.

== Version

Revision: 1

== Contributors

Joe Garvey, Intel +
Abhishek Tiwari, Intel

== Dependencies

This extension is written against the SYCL 2020 specification, Revision 4 and
the following extensions:

> - link:sycl_ext_oneapi_properties.asciidoc[sycl_ext_oneapi_properties]

Author: I removed the hyperlink for now. Need to figure out how to link to a file in a different directory.

> - link:sycl_ext_oneapi_properties.asciidoc[sycl_ext_oneapi_properties]

Author: Corrected the link.

- link:sycl_ext_oneapi_kernel_properties.asciidoc[sycl_ext_oneapi_kernel_properties]

== Feature Test Macro

This extension provides a feature-test macro as described in the core SYCL
specification section 6.3.3 "Feature test macros".  Therefore, an
implementation supporting this extension must predefine the macro

> `SYCL_EXT_ONEAPI_KERNEL_PROPERTIES` to one of the values defined in the table

Author: ```suggestion
`SYCL_EXT_INTEL_FPGA_KERNEL_INTERFACE_PROPERTIES` to one of the values defined in the table
```

> `SYCL_EXT_ONEAPI_KERNEL_PROPERTIES` to one of the values defined in the table

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`SYCL_EXT_INTEL_FPGA_KERNEL_INTERFACE_PROPERTIES` to one of the values defined in the table
```

below.  Applications can test for the existence of this macro to determine if
the implementation supports this feature, or applications can test the macro's
value to determine which of the extension's APIs the implementation supports.

[%header,cols="1,5"]
|===
|Value |Description
|1     |Initial extension version.  Base features are supported.
|===

== Overview

> This extension specifies the kernel properties designed for kernels that target

Reviewer: This sentence is simultaneously too specific (as the "the" implies that no other extensions might add FPGA kernel properties) and too vague (there's no indication of what these properties are about).  I suggest something like this instead:

This extension introduces kernel properties to specify how or when control and data signals can be passed in to or out of an FPGA kernel.  These properties are meaningless on non-FPGA devices and can be ignored on such devices.

Given that there are only two properties, you could even go further and summarize them both like so:

The ip_interface_streaming property requires the kernel to have a dedicated output port for each control or data signal, as opposed to using a shared CSR interface.  The ip_pipelined property directs the compiler to pipeline calls to the kernel so that multiple invocations of the kernel can be in flight simultaneously.

Author: Updated. Since it's 4 properties now, I have placed the additional description in the properties table.

> the FPGA device. These properties are supported by the Intel FPGA backend

Reviewer: Which compilers support this extension is irrelevant for the sake of the definition of the extension itself.

Author: Updated.

compiler.

== Kernel Properties

```c++
namespace sycl {
namespace ext {
namespace oneapi {
namespace experimental {

// Corresponds to ip_interface_streaming
struct ip_interface_streaming_key {
  template <bool is_stall_free_return>
  using value_t = property_value<ip_interface_streaming_key, std::bool_constant<bool, is_stall_free_return>>;
}; // ip_interface_streaming_key

// Corresponds to ip_interface_streaming_stall_free_return
struct ip_pipelined_key {
  using value_t = property_value<ip_pipelined_key>;
}; // ip_pipelined_key

template<bool is_stall_free_return = false>
inline constexpr ip_interface_streaming_key::value_t<is_stall_free_return> ip_interface_streaming;
inline constexpr bool ip_stall_free_return = true;

inline constexpr ip_interface_streaming_key::value_t ip_interface_streaming_stall_free_return;

inline constexpr ip_interface_streaming_key::value_t ip_pipelined;

} // namespace experimental
} // namespace oneapi
} // namespace ext
} // namespace sycl
```

|===
|Property|Description
|`ip_interface_streaming`
|The `ip_interface_streaming` property adds the requirement that the kernel must
 have dedicated ports for input / output signals in the generated

>  Register Transfer Level (RTL) module.

Reviewer: I would drop the mention of RTL.  It confuses things to refer to the description of the hardware as being separate from the hardware itself.  
Also, I think your intent is for this to apply to both control and data signals.  Can you state the explicitly?  And assuming that this should apply to data signals as well, should it apply to all inputs/outputs from the kernel, i.e. pipes as well, or only kernel arguments?

Author: Added explicit statement. Specified that it should apply to kernel arguments and control flow signals only. Including pipes seems to make sense. I need to think a bit more about including them.

 
 The property takes a constant boolean template argument. When the value of the
 argument is `true` it adds the requirement that the kernel module should not

>  take a 'stall' control flow signal from downstream logic as input. The kernel

Reviewer: Why is the stall-freedom a template parameter of ip_interface_streaming instead of its own property?  How can a user guarantee that done signals are not lost in a pipelined kernel with a CSR interface if there is no way to backpressure the done signal?

Author: It should be its own property. Updated.

 can take such an input signal otherwise. Pass the value `true` to this argument
 when the downstream logic is known to not stall.
 
 For convenience, a constant bool named `stall_free_return` with the value
 `true` is provided.

> |`ip_pipelined`

Reviewer: I'm not a big fan of the "ip" at the beginning of each of these names.  What concept are you trying to get across with this prefix?

Author: Changed the names to:
```
streaming_kernel
csr_kernel
stall_free_return_kernel
pipelined_kernel
```
1. Perhaps `stall_free_return_kernel` should be renamed to `no_backpressure_kernel`
2. Other kernel properties do not have a '_kernel' post-fix. I think we should instead use the names:
```
streaming_interface
csr_interface
no_backpressure_interface
pipelined
```
Thoughts?

Reviewer: #2: agreed.  Let's be consistent with other kernel properties.
#1: let's run it by internal users to see whether they prefer "stall_free" or "no_backpressure"

Author: Updated based on the discussion with internal users.

}; // pipelined_kernel_key

inline constexpr streaming_kernel_key::value_t streaming_kernel;

inline constexpr csr_kernel_key::value_t csr_kernel;

inline constexpr stall_free_return_kernel_key::value_t stall_free_return_kernel;

inline constexpr pipelined_kernel_key::value_t pipelined_kernel;

} // namespace experimental
} // namespace oneapi
} // namespace ext
} // namespace sycl
```

|===
|Property|Description
|`streaming_kernel`
|The `streaming_kernel` property adds the requirement that the kernel must
 have dedicated ports for input / output signals. This applies for both
 control, and kernel argument data signals.

|`csr_kernel`
|The `csr_kernel` property adds the requirement that the kernel must have
 its input / output control and kernel argument data signals placed in a shared
 Control and Status Register (CSR) map.

|`stall_free_return_kernel`
|The `stall_free_return_kernel` property provides the compiler the guarantee
 that downstream logic will not back-pressure the kernel.

|`pipelined_kernel`
| The `pipelined_kernel` property directs the compiler to pipeline calls to the
 kernel so that multiple invocations of the kernel can be in flight

>  simultaneously.

Reviewer 2: Do you mean several instances of a `single_task` or this is pipelining at the work-item level?

Reviewer: This refers to several instances of a kernel, most commonly a single_task kernel.  It does not refer to pipelining of work-items.  However, there's no reason this couldn't be applied to a parallel_for kernel to request that successive launches of that kernel be pipelined _in addition to_ the usual work item pipelining.  In such a kernel, the work items could be injected into the datapath one after another and, after the last work item from a given kernel invocation has been injected, the first work-item of the next invocation could be injected without waiting for the pipeline to drain.  

I don't see much value in a control to enable or disable pipelining at the work-item level because that's nearly always beneficial.  This invocation pipelining is more situational though as it only provides value if the user intends to launch the same kernel multiple times.

|===

Device compilers that do not support this extension may accept and ignore these
 properties.

== Adding a Property List to a Kernel Launch

A simple example of using this extension to launch a kernel with a streaming
 interface is shown below.

The example assumes that the kernel will not be back-pressured by the downstream
logic and hence uses the property `stall_free_return_kernel`:

```c++
sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental::properties properties{
  sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental::streaming_kernel,
  sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental::stall_free_return_kernel};

> q.single_task(properties, [=]() {

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
q.single_task(properties, [=] {
```

  *a = *b + *c;
}).wait();
```

== Embedding Properties into a Kernel

The example below shows how the kernel from the previous section could be
rewritten to leverage an embedded property list:

```c++
struct KernelFunctor {

  KernelFunctor(int* a, int* b, int* c) : a(a), b(b), c(c) {}

  void operator()() const {
    *a = *b + *c;
  }

>   auto get(sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental::properties_tag) {

Reviewer 2: Is this a magic function that encode the properties? How it is connected to the `single_task` below?

in the table below.  Applications can test for the existence of this macro to
determine if the implementation supports this feature, or applications can test
the macro's value to determine which of the extension's APIs the implementation
supports.

[%header,cols="1,5"]
|===
|Value |Description
|1     |Initial extension version.  Base features are supported.
|===

=== Introduction

This extension introduces new kernel properties that can be applied to kernels
using the mechanism defined in sycl_ext_oneapi_kernel_properties.

=== Kernel Interface Properties

```c++
namespace sycl::ext::intel::experimental {

enum class streaming_interface_options_enum {
  accept_downstream_stall,
  remove_downstream_stall
};

enum class register_map_interface_options_enum {
  wait_for_done_write,
  do_not_wait_for_done_write
};

struct streaming_interface_key {
  template <streaming_interface_options_enum option>
  using value_t = property_value<streaming_interface_key,
    std::integral_constant<streaming_interface_options_enum, option>>;
};

struct register_map_interface_key {
  template <register_map_interface_options_enum option>

>   using value_t = property_value<register_map_interface_key,

Author: Hi @steffenlarsen , Instead of `property_value`, should this be rewritten as `sycl::ext::oneapi::properties::property_value` ? Or perhaps I should add a `using sycl::ext::oneapi::properties` at the top?

Author: Updated!

 compiler to pipeline calls to the kernel such that multiple invocations of the
 kernel can be in flight simultaneously. The parameter value also specifies the
 minimum number of cycles between successive invocations of the kernel. Example:

 * `pipelined<N>` - The compiler will pipeline multiple kernel invocations such
 that an invocation can be launched every `N` cycles if one is available.
 
 When the parameter is set to `0`, the compiler will not pipeline kernel
 invocations.

 If the `pipelined` property is not specified, the default behavior is
 equivalent to a combination of the property parameter values listed above, but
 the choice is implementation defined.
|===

Device compilers that do not support this extension may accept and ignore these
 properties.

=== Adding a Property List to a Kernel Launch

A simple example of using this extension to launch a kernel with a streaming
 interface is shown below.

The example assumes that the kernel will not accept a signal that can
back-pressure it and hence uses the property
`streaming_interface_remove_downstream_stall`:

```c++
using sycl::ext::intel::experimental;
{
  ...

>   properties kernel_properties{streaming_interface_remove_downstream_stall};

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  auto kernel_properties = properties{streaming_interface_remove_downstream_stall};
```
And similar in other places.

Reviewer 2: This is bike-shedding but I usually push into the other direction, when `auto` is useless and longer. :-)

Reviewer 3: Honestly, I wasn't sure it would accept the type without the template arguments explicitly there, but I guess I've learned something new. In that case I definitely like the old version better. Thanks @keryell! 😄

= sycl_ext_intel_fpga_kernel_interface_properties
:source-highlighter: coderay
:coderay-linenums-mode: table

// This section needs to be after the document title.
:doctype: book
:toc2:
:toc: left
:encoding: utf-8
:lang: en

:blank: pass:[ +]

// Set the default source code type in this document to C++,
// for syntax highlighting purposes.  This is needed because
// docbook uses c++ and html5 uses cpp.
:language: {basebackend@docbook:c++:cpp}

== Notice

[%hardbreaks]
Copyright (c) 2021-2022 Intel Corporation.  All rights reserved.

Khronos(R) is a registered trademark and SYCL(TM) and SPIR(TM) are trademarks
of The Khronos Group Inc.  OpenCL(TM) is a trademark of Apple Inc. used by
permission by Khronos.

== Contact

To report problems with this extension, please open a new issue at:
https://github.com/intel/llvm/issues

== Contributors

Joe Garvey, Intel +
Abhishek Tiwari, Intel

== Dependencies

This extension is written against the SYCL 2020 specification, Revision 4 and
the following extensions:

- link:../experimental/sycl_ext_oneapi_properties.asciidoc[sycl_ext_oneapi_properties]

> - link:sycl_ext_oneapi_kernel_properties.asciidoc[sycl_ext_oneapi_kernel_properties]

Reviewer: Links are broken

Author: They seem to be working now.
oneapi properties is in experimental folder: https://github.com/intel/llvm/tree/sycl/sycl/doc/extensions/experimental
and oneapi kernel properties will be in the proposed folder after 5755 PR goes in : https://github.com/intel/llvm/pull/5755/files

== Status

This is a proposed extension specification, intended to gather community
feedback. Interfaces defined in this specification may not be implemented yet
or may be in a preliminary state. The specification itself may also change in
incompatible ways before it is finalized. *Shipping software products should not
rely on APIs defined in this specification.*

== Overview

This extension introduces kernel properties to specify how or when control and

> data signals can be passed in to or out of an FPGA kernel. These properties are

Reviewer: ```suggestion
data signals can be passed into or out of an FPGA kernel. These properties are
```

- link:sycl_ext_oneapi_kernel_properties.asciidoc[sycl_ext_oneapi_kernel_properties]

== Feature Test Macro

This extension provides a feature-test macro as described in the core SYCL
specification section 6.3.3 "Feature test macros".  Therefore, an
implementation supporting this extension must predefine the macro
`SYCL_EXT_INTEL_FPGA_KERNEL_INTERFACE_PROPERTIES` to one of the values defined
in the table below.  Applications can test for the existence of this macro to
determine if the implementation supports this feature, or applications can test
the macro's value to determine which of the extension's APIs the implementation
supports.

[%header,cols="1,5"]
|===
|Value |Description
|1     |Initial extension version.  Base features are supported.
|===

== Overview

This extension introduces kernel properties to specify how or when control and
data signals can be passed in to or out of an FPGA kernel. These properties are
meaningless on non-FPGA devices and can be ignored on such devices.

== Kernel Properties

```c++

> namespace sycl {
> namespace ext {
> namespace oneapi {
> namespace experimental {

Reviewer 2: C++17 is good for FPGA :-)
```suggestion
namespace sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental {
```
Along this, it should be good to have at least one example showing how a namespace alias like
```c++
namespace oe = sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental;
```
can be used to write shorter code, just in case some HLS people without any SYCL or C++ knowledge can see how to write compact code and not think that SYCL is overly verbose.

    streaming_interface_remove_downstream_stall;

inline constexpr register_map_interface_key::value_t<
  register_map_interface_options_enum::wait_for_done_read>
    register_map_interface_wait_for_done_read;

inline constexpr register_map_interface_key::value_t<
  register_map_interface_options_enum::do_not_wait_for_done_read>
    register_map_interface_do_not_wait_for_done_read;

inline constexpr register_map_interface_key::value_t<option>
  register_map_interface;

template<int initiation_interval_value>
inline constexpr initiation_interval_key::value_t<initiation_interval_value>
  initiation_interval;

template<bool pipeline_directive, typename initiation_interval>
inline constexpr pipelined_key::value_t<pipeline_directive,
  initiation_interval> pipelined;

} // namespace experimental
} // namespace oneapi
} // namespace ext
} // namespace sycl
```

|===
|Property|Description
|`streaming_interface`
|The `streaming_interface` property adds the requirement that the kernel must
 have dedicated ports for input / output signals. This applies for both
 control, and kernel argument data signals. The following values are supported:

>  * `accept_downstream_stall`: Provides the compiler the guarantee that

Reviewer: A "guarantee that downstream logic will back-pressure the kernel" sounds like a guarantee that the ready signal is never high and thus that the kernel never needs to do anything.  That's definitely not what you intended.  You could reword this as: "Instructs the compiler to build a backpressure input port to the kernel (e.g. a ready signal for the avalon-ST protocol)."

    downstream logic will back-pressure the kernel.

>  * `remove_downstream_stall`: Provides the compiler the guarantee that

Reviewer: It goes beyond that, right?  This directs the compiler to omit the port entirely.

|`register_map_interface`
|The `register_map_interface` property adds the requirement that the kernel must
 have its input / output control and kernel argument data signals placed in a
 shared Control and Status Register (CSR) map. The following values are
 supported:

 * `wait_for_done_write`: Directs the compiler to generate logic that
    back-pressures the kernel until the kernel is notified that its completion
    has been detected. The kernel will be notified when the register it writes

>     its completion signal to is set to 1.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    its completion signal to is set to 0.
```

If it's a "done" register then the kernel should write 1 to it when it finishes and the user should write 0 to it to say "I've seen your done".

>     its completion signal to, is set to 1.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    its completion signal to is set to 1.
```

|`register_map_interface`
|The `register_map_interface` property adds the requirement that the kernel must have
 its input / output control and kernel argument data signals placed in a shared
 Control and Status Register (CSR) map. The following values are supported:

>  * `wait_for_done_read`: Provides the compiler the guarantee that downstream

Reviewer: I thought we didn't want to use a read-on-clear approach and had instead discussed requiring the user to overwrite the done bit with a 0 if they want backpressure.  If we go that way, we should probably call this "wait_for_done_write" or "wait_for_done_clear".

Reviewer: Also, this definition is vague and misleading.  The user is guaranteeing anything to the compiler, they are asking us to build logic that backpressures the kernel until they've told us they've seen the done.

    logic will back-pressure the kernel.

>  * `do_not_wait_for_done_read`: Provides the compiler the guarantee that

Reviewer: This one is more of a guarantee but it still seems like the wrong choice of words.  The user is telling the compiler that it can build hardware that doesn't backpressure the kernel.  I.e. that the user's system is either tolerant to dropped dones or that they are going to throttle the kernel themselves sufficiently to ensure that no done are dropped.

    downstream logic will not back-pressure the kernel.
 
 If the `register_map_interface` property is not specified, the default behavior is
 equivalent to one of the values listed above, but the choice is implementation
 defined.

 The following properties have been provided for convenience:
 `register_map_interface_wait_for_done_read`,
 `register_map_interface_do_not_wait_for_done_read`.

|`pipelined`
|Two sets of values are accepted as property parameters - a boolean, and another
 property `initiation_interval`.

 When the boolean parameter is set to `true`, the property directs the compiler
 to pipeline calls to the kernel such that multiple invocations of the kernel

>  can be in flight simultaneously. When the boolean paramter is set to `false`,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 can be in flight simultaneously. When the boolean parameter is set to `false`,
```

 the compiler will not pipeline kernel invocations.

>  The second property argument should be used to specify how many cycles can

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 The second property argument specifies how many cycles can
```

>  exist between multiple invocations of the kernel. The `initiation_interval`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 exist between successive invocations of the kernel. The `initiation_interval`
```

>  

Reviewer: You might want to mention here that if the bool is false, the initiation_interval parameter is meaningless.

>  attempt to launch the kernel invocations as fast as it can.

Reviewer: I propose we leave this as an implementation detail.  As written it implies that an implementation must aggressively pursue II=1 even if that doesn't make sense (e.g. because the kernel contains a loop with II=1 with high trip count which will be the bottleneck anyways).

Author: Updated to mark this as implementation defined.

 * `true, intiation_interval<N>`: The compiler will pipeline multiple kernel
   invocations such that an invocation is launched every N cycles.
 
 If the `initiation_interval` property argument is not specified, the compiler
 will attempt to launch the kernel invocations as fast as it can.
 
 If the `pipelined` property is not specified, the default behavior is
 equivalent to a combination of the property parameter values listed above, but
 the choice is implementation defined.
|===

Device compilers that do not support this extension may accept and ignore these
 properties.

== Adding a Property List to a Kernel Launch

A simple example of using this extension to launch a kernel with a streaming
 interface is shown below.

The example assumes that the kernel will not be back-pressured by the downstream

> logic and hence uses the property `stall_free_return_kernel`:

Reviewer: This is the old name and also the example below does accept a stall so these need to be made consistent.

```c++
sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental::properties properties{
  sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental::streaming_interface_accept_downstream_stall};

q.single_task(properties, [=] {
  *a = *b + *c;
}).wait();
```

The example below shows how to launch a pipelined kernel with a streaming

> interface, and with every kernel invocation being launched every 2 cycles.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
interface, and with a new kernel invocation being launched every 2 cycles.
```

|`register_map_interface`
|The `register_map_interface` property adds the requirement that the kernel must
 have its input / output control and kernel argument data signals placed in a
 shared Control and Status Register (CSR) map. The following values are
 supported:

 * `wait_for_done_write`: Directs the compiler to generate logic that
    back-pressures the kernel until the kernel is notified that its completion
    has been detected. The kernel will be notified when the register it writes
    its completion signal to, is set to 1.

 * `do_not_wait_for_done_write`: Directs the compiler to not generate logic that
    would back-pressure the kernel until the kernel is notified of its
    completion being detected.
 
 If the `register_map_interface` property is not specified, the default behavior
 is equivalent to one of the values listed above, but the choice is
 implementation defined.

 The following properties have been provided for convenience:
 `register_map_interface_wait_for_done_write`,
 `register_map_interface_do_not_wait_for_done_write`.

|`pipelined`
|Two sets of values are accepted as property parameters - a boolean, and another

>  property `initiation_interval`.

Reviewer 3: Is there a benefit to defining `initiation_interval` as a property? I worry that having it use the property interface may wrongfully give the user the idea that it is to be used like a property, while it is simply intended for use inside the `pipelined` property. It also adds more to the implementation, as properties need to define a number of things under the hood, whereas if we define it as some simple wrapper class we can avoid that.

Author: Hi Steffen, I have updated the spec, please review again. Thank you!

  do_not_wait_for_done_write
};

template <int N>
struct initiation_interval {

>   int initiation_interval_value = N;

Reviewer 3: Is this expected to mutate? Otherwise it would be better to have it be `static constexpr`. Also, the naming of the value member seems a little verbose, given it simply repeats the type name. Would `value` be too simple a name?

Author: Value is not expected to mutate so I will make it a `static constexpr` and yes I can rename the field to `value` as I don't think that the more verbose name is needed.
